Project: Dream School District

1. motivation

Nowadays, hundreds and thousands of parents share the same worry: which school to send their child to. All kinds of reasons may impede families from selecting the best school for their child. If the family lives in a disadvantage school district without any good school nearby, parents may choose to send their child to better school further away regardless of the location, which will at the same time present transportation challenge to the parents. According to a John Hopkins University study published in 2015, more parents are willing to spend hours on the road and spend millions of dollars in housing, or even sacrifice their career to assure their child receive the best education. This appears to be a conflict between child's education and parent's career. The Dream School District program is designed to help these struggling parents to establish a balance between work and their kid's education. The users only need to provide information about the their working location, the commute distance preference, and the age of their children. Then, every highly-rated school districts within the preferred commute area will be scored based on these information using a customized Naive Bayesian Model. In the end, the Dream School District program will recommend a list of school districts that best fit their child's schooling needs within manageable commute distance. It will also provide information about other education options in the neighborhood, and the nearby housing/renting price for the users’ reference.

2. Data and Methodology

The main data to build the predict model is scraped from GreatSchools.org, a leading national nonprofit organization. GreatSchools.org uses a 1-10 scale to score all PK-12 education institutions nationwide based on their standardized test scores, ethnicity, teacher/student ratio, etc., and provide school&parenting information.

In this project, I focus only on districts that contains above-average school(s). I use Naive Bayesian Model to estimate a set of 'general' coefficients to score each highly-rated school. The variables I incorporate in this model include three groups of information: 1) characteristics of the above-average school(s) in the region (type of school, parent's rating, academic, equity, and environment features); 2) information about the particular living district (average GreatSchools' rating, school intensity, ); and 3) information about the neighbor districts (average GreatSchools' rating, school intensity, all neighbor variables are distance-weighted). Then, start from this baseline Naive Bayesian Model, I generate a customized rating model for each user by adjusting the coefficients accordingly based on his/her specific characteristics: commute preference, house income, ethnicity, and the performance of their child, etc. For example, public school is more preferable to low-income families, the diversity of students is especially meaningful for minorities, and the availability of more school options are valuable for kids whose performance are below-average. With the adjusted model, a personalized school score is generated for each highly-rated school that falls in the commute shed of the parents. The final outcome of this program is a list of recommended school districts in descending order with detailed information about the school, the district, and its neighborhood.

3. Robustness

Since my prediction is based on the overlapped commute distance of both parents, two types of error might be generated. First, there may be no highly-rated school within this allowable commute region. To deal with this problem, I'll first ask if the user can increase the allowed commute distance of either one or both of the parents. If not, I'll extend the school selection criterion to the tier of average rated schools and apply the prediction model to score these school districts. Second error may occur if there is no overlap between the travel distance circles of the two parents. In other words, there is no district can meet the commute need of both parents. Facing this error, I will still ask for an extension in the commute distance first. Otherwise, I'll provide three sets of results for consideration: 1) recommended districts that meet the commute need of the mother 2) recommended districts that meet the commute need of the father 3) recommended districts that lie on the linear segment connecting the work places of two parents.

4. Analyze and Discussion
In the early stage of this project, I currently analyze the school data in MA in the zipcode level. I'm still working on scraping the nationwide school information from GreatSchools.org.

Based on the MA school, geographic, and demographic data, I first examine the relationship between county-level median wage and distribution of highly-rated schools. 
1) From the map, we can see that good schools tend to locate in regions with higher wage. Especially in Norfolk and Middlesex, these two counties have about 250 above-average schools. The scatter plot also shows that the number of good schools increases with local wage. This indicates that, at least in county level, the career development of parents and the schooling choice of kids are not very contradict with each other.
2) When we further examine the distribution of highly-rated schools by different education levels, we notice that the elementary education in MA is  stronger than upper-level educations. In addition, MA seems in short of good quality preschools and middle schools based on the map and plot. Therefore, I suggest to put more weight on preschool and middle school when recommending the optimal target neighborhood for a family to live.

The second map illustrates the relationship between the number of highly-rated schools and the total number of schools in each zipcode. From the map, we can observe two features of the distribution of best-rated schools:
1) Good schools display a trend of clustering. They tend to locate in area close to regions with intensive education institutes.
2) Highly-rated schools are also exclusive. There are less condensed schools located in the same zipcode region as the good schools. Maybe it is because that these highly-rated schools have absorbed most of the education resources which depleted the development of other schools.

4. Conclusion

In the next step, I plan to build the prediction model using nationwide school data, and construct a user-friendly webpage to allow parents to use this Dream School District program to get valuable recommendations on the optimal district to live.
